>> Sreenivasan: ON THIS EDITION
FOR SUNDAY, APRIL 16: REACTIONS
FOLLOWING NORTH KOREA'S FAILED
MISSILE TEST.
TURKEY'S PRESIDENT SEEKS MORE
EXECUTIVE POWER.
AND IN OUR SIGNATURE SEGMENT--
PAID FAMILY LEAVE; A RARE JOB
BENEFIT TAKING HOLD IN RHODE
ISLAND.
>> THANKFULLY, RHODE ISLAND HAD
THIS TEMPORARY DISABILITY
INSURANCE IN PLACE, SO I WAS
ABLE TO USE THAT TO COVER MY OWN
CARE.
AND THAT'S REALLY WHEN WE
REALIZED WHAT A STRESSOR THAT
WAS ON A FAMILY WHEN YOU NEED TO
BE ABLE TO TAKE CARE OF SOMEBODY
ELSE.
>> Sreenivasan: NEXT ON "PBS
NEWSHOUR WEEKEND."
>>FROM THE TISCH WNET STUDIOS
AT LINCOLN CENTER IN NEW YORK,
HARI SREENIVASAN.
>> Sreenivasan: GOOD EVENING,
AND THANKS FOR JOINING US.
PRESIDENT TRUMP'S NATIONAL
SECURITY ADVISER H.R. McMASTER
CALLS NORTH KOREA'S LATEST AND
FAILED MISSILE TEST PART OF A,
QUOTE, "PATTERN OF PROVOCATIVE,
DESTABILIZING AND THREATENING
BEHAVIOR."
ONLY HOURS AFTER YESTERDAY'S
MASSIVE MILITARY PARADE IN
PYONGYANG, NORTH KOREA LAUNCHED
WHAT WAS BELIEVED TO BE A
MEDIUM-RANGE MISSILE.
U.S. PACIFIC COMMAND SAID IT
BLEW UP ONLY FOUR OR FIVE
SECONDS AFTER LAUNCH.
SOUTH KOREA SAID THE TEST"
THREATENED THE WHOLE WORLD" AND
JAPAN CALLED IT A "PROVOCATION."
SHORTLY AFTER THE FAILED MISSILE
TEST, THE PENTAGON SAID
PRESIDENT TRUMP HAD BEEN
BRIEFED, BUT MR. TRUMP DID NOT
COMMENT.
THE PRESIDENT ATTENDED EASTER
SERVICES WITH HIS FAMILY TODAY
AT A CHURCH IN PALM BEACH,
FLORIDA, WHERE THEY'RE SPENDING
THE HOLIDAY WEEKEND.
VICE PRESIDENT PENCE WAS ABOARD
AIR FORCE TWO WHEN THE MISSILE
TEST OCCURRED.
HE SPOKE ABOUT IT AFTER LANDING
IN SEOUL, SOUTH KOREA, HIS FIRST
STOP ON A TEN DAY TRIP ABROAD
THAT WILL ALSO TAKE HIM TO
JAPAN, INDONESIA, AND AUSTRALIA.
>> THIS MORNING'S PROVOCATION
FROM THE NORTH IS JUST THE
LATEST REMINDER OF THE RISKS
EACH ONE OF YOU FACE EVERY DAY
IN THE DEFENSE OF THE FREEDOM OF
THE PEOPLE OF SOUTH KOREA AND
THE DEFENSE OF AMERICA IN THIS
PART OF THE WORLD.
>> Sreenivasan: A FOREIGN POLICY
ADVISER TRAVELING WITH PENCE
SAID THE U.S. WAS NOT PLANNING
AN IMMEDIATE MILITARY RESPONSE.
SEVEN DECADES AFTER THE KOREAN
WAR, THE U.S. STILL HAS 28,000
TROOPS STATIONED IN SOUTH KOREA.
NATIONAL SECURITY ADVISOR H.R.
McMASTER, WHO WAS MEETING WITH
GOVERNMENT OFFICIALS IN
AFGHANISTAN TODAY, SAID IN AN
INTERVIEW THE U.S. AND CHINA ARE
DEVELOPING A RANGE OF OPTIONS TO
DEAL WITH NORTH KOREA.
>> SO IN THE COMING WEEKS,
MONTHS, I THINK THERE'S A GREAT
OPPORTUNITY FOR ALL OF US-- ALL
OF US WHO ARE REALLY UNDER THE
THREAT NOW OF THIS UNPREDICTABLE
REGIME-- TO TAKE ACTION SHORT OF
ARMED CONFLICT, SO WE CAN AVOID
THE WORST.
>> Sreenivasan: THE
ADMINISTRATION OF TURKEY'S
PRESIDENT, RECEP TAYYIP ERDOGAN,
IS CLAIMING VICTORY IN TODAY'S
REFERENDUM TO EXPAND THE
PRESIDENT'S EXECUTIVE POWERS.
WITH 99% OF THE VOTES COUNTED,
TURKISH ELECTION OFFICIALS SAID
51% OF TURKS VOTED "YES" TO
AMEND THE COUNTRY'S
CONSTITUTION.
IT WILL RESULT IN ABOLISHING THE
OFFICE OF PRIME MINISTER AND
ALLOWING THE PRESIDENT TO DRAFT
THE BUDGET, ISSUE DECREES, AND
APPOINT JUDGES WITHOUT
PARLIAMENTARY APPROVAL.
PRESIDENT ERDOGAN CAST HIS
BALLOT IN ISTANBUL AND CALLED A
YES VOTE "A CHOICE FOR CHANGE
AND TRANSFORMATION."
OPPONENTS CHARGE THE CHANGES
WILL LEAD TO AUTHORITARIAN, ONE-
MAN RULE AND THEY HAVE ALREADY
BEGUN CHALLENGING THE RESULTS.
FOR MORE ON THE REFERENDUM, I AM
JOINED BY SKYPE FROM ISTANBUL BY
"NEW YORK TIMES" REPORTER
PATRICK KINGSLEY.
PATRICK, THIS IS CLOSE.
I'M SURE YOU'VE BEEN WATCHING IT
ALL NIGHT.
BUT ONE SIDE IS CLAIMING VICTORY
AND THE OTHER SIDE SAYS, NOT SO
FAST.
>> WELL, EXACTLY.
THE ADMINISTRATION OF PRESIDENT
RECEP TAYYIP ERDOGAN HAS CLAIMED
VICTORY.
HIS PRIME MINISTER BEN ALI WILL
BE OUT OF A JOB, JUST MADE A
SPEECH CLAIMING VICTORY.
THE MAIN OPPOSITION HAS
CONTESTING WHAT IT SAYS AROUND
37% OF BALLOT BOXES AND THAT
COULD BE WELL OVER TWO MILLION
VOTES IN THERE.
>> Sreenivasan: WHAT IS THE
CONCERN THE OPPOSITION HAS?
>> NO CIRCULATING TAKING FIVE
BALLOT SLIPS AND PLACING THEM
WITHIN A BALLOT BOX AND THE MAIN
OPPOSITION, CHP SAYS THERE COULD
BE THOUSANDS BUT YET TO BE
PROVED.
>> Sreenivasan: HOW STRONG IS
THE POSSIBILITY THAT THE
OPPOSITION COULD MOUNT ENOUGH OF
A CHALLENGE TO EIGHT OVER THE
ROLE OF PRESIDENT FOR A COUPLE
OF YEARS?
FOR PEOPLE WATCHING IN THE
UNITED STATES HOW COMPETITIVE IS
IT THEN?
>> IT FEELS VERY UNLIKELY AT THE
MOMENT.
PRESIDENT ERDOGAN IS FOR THE
MOMENT THE MOST POPULAR MAN IN
TURKEY AT THE MOMENT EVEN IF HE
IS A VERY DIVISIVE MAN.
IF THERE'S A MAIN FIGURE WITHIN
THE MAIN OPPOSITION PARTY WHO IS
CURRENTLY OUT OF JAIL WHO COULD
MOUNT A PARTICULARLY STRONG
OPPOSITION TO HIM, NEVER SAY
NEVER BUT HE SEEMS UNLIKELY TO
WIN IN 2019 AND HIS OPPOSITION
PARTY SEEMS TO BE THE BIGGEST
PARTY IN PARLIAMENT.
THE ONLY MEANS TO HAVE A CHECK
ON THE PRESIDENT IS TO FORM A
MAJORITY IN PARLIAMENT IN TURKEY
RIGHT NOW BUT THAT SEEMS
UNLIKELY.
>> HOW MUCH OF A FACTOR DID THE
ATTEMPTED COUP PLAY INTO THIS
VOTE?
>> IT MAY HAVE A MAJOR EFFECT,
BECAUSE PRESIDENT ERDOGAN WAS
ABLE TO SHOW THERE WAS A VERY
REAL THREAT TO TURKISH
DEMOCRACY.
THE FACTION IN THE
ARMY TRYING TO SURFACE FROM
POWER. AND FOR THAT REASON, WE
NEED TO CREATE A STABILITY AND
YOU THE ELECTORATE NIGHT TO VOTE
FOR THIS CONSTITUTIONAL CHANGE
THAT WOULD CENTRALIZE POWER OF
THE PRESIDENT.
>> Sreenivasan: WAS TURKEY AND
WAS ERDOGAN CONSCIOUS OF WHAT
THE REST OF THE WORLD THOUGHT OF
THIS REFERENDUM AND WHAT HAPPENS
TOMORROW?
>> THEY WERE VERY CONSCIOUS, THE
RENAL WHY PRESIDENT ERDOGAN AND
HIS ALLIES STOKED SO MANY
BATTLES WITH EUROPEAN AND
EUROPEAN POLITICIANS, HE CALLED
THE EUROPEANS NAZIS IN HOLLAND
AND GERMANY, THE REASON HE DID
THAT WAS TO SEEM TURKEY UNDER
SIEGE, AND MAKING THEM SEEMING
LIKE ONLY PRESIDENT ERDOGAN WAS
STANDING UP FOR THEM AND TURKEY.
HE WAS VERY WELL AWARE OF HOW
THEY FELT THE TURKEY AND HOW
THEY FELT ABOUT IT.
>> Sreenivasan: THANK YOU
PATRICK KINGSLEY.
>> Sreenivasan: IN A DEVELOPMENT
THAT COULD UPSET NEIGHBORING
INDIA, LANDLOCKED NEPAL TODAY
LAUNCHED ITS FIRST EVER JOINT
MILITARY EXERCISES WITH CHINA,
ITS NEIGHBOR TO THE NORTH.
NEPAL SAID THE TEN DAYS OF
EXERCISES AT ITS PARATROOP
TRAINING SCHOOL IN KATHMANDU
WILL FOCUS ON COUNTERTERRORISM,
BUT DID NOT SAY HOW MANY
NEPALESE AND CHINESE TROOPS ARE
INVOLVED.
CHINESE PRESIDENT XI JINPING AND
NEPAL'S PRIME MINISTER MET
RECENTLY IN BEIJING AND AGREED
TO INCREASE COOPERATION.
CHINA ALSO GAVE NEPAL BILLIONS
OF DOLLARS TO HELP IT REBUILD
AFTER A DEVASTATING EARTHQUAKE
IN 2015.
THE AMBITIOUS EVACUEE-SWAP OF
SYRIAN CIVILIANS BETWEEN
GOVERNMENT AND REBEL-HELD AREAS
RESUMED TODAY FOLLOWING
YESTERDAY'S DEVASTATING CAR BOMB
ATTACK ON BUSES CARRYING
EVACUEES NEAR ALEPPO.
TODAY'S EXCHANGE OF THOUSANDS OF
EVACUEES INVOLVED FOUR BESIEGED
TOWNS, TWO PRO-GOVERNMENT
VILLAGES AND TWO REBEL-HELD
TOWNS.
THE SYRIAN OBSERVATORY FOR HUMAN
RIGHTS SAYS THE DEATH TOLL FROM
YESTERDAY'S BOMBING OF A BUS
CONVOY HAS RISEN TO AT LEAST
126, WITH MOST OF THE VICTIMS
WOMEN AND CHILDREN.
AT THE VATICAN TODAY, POPE
FRANCIS DELIVERED HIS
TRADITIONAL EASTER MESSAGE FROM
THE BALCONY OF SAINT PETER'S
BASILICA.
HIS FOCUS WAS WAR AND VIOLENCE
AROUND THE WORLD, AND IN
PARTICULAR, SYRIA.
REFERRING TO YESTERDAY'S BUS
CONVOY BOMBING, THE POPE
CONDEMNED WHAT HE CALLED, "THE
LATEST VILE ATTACK" ON REFUGEES.
FRANCIS ALSO DENOUNCED
REPRESSIVE REGIMES AND URGED
WORLD LEADERS TO EASE CONFLICTS.
>> IN THE COMPLEX AND OFTEN
DRAMATIC SITUATIONS OF TODAY'S
WORLD, MAY THE RISEN LORD GUIDE
THE STEPS OF ALL THOSE WHO WORK
FOR JUSTICE AND PEACE.
MAY HE GRANT THE LEADERS OF
NATIONS THE COURAGE THEY NEED TO
PREVENT THE SPREAD OF CONFLICTS
AND TO PUT A HALT TO THE ARMS
TRADE.
>>THIS ARTIST AND FILMMAKER HAS
DOCUMENTED THE RISE OF FAR
RIGHT NATIONALISM IN CENTRAL
EUROPE.
READ MORE AT
www.pbs.org/newshour.
>> Sreenivasan: FEDERAL LAW
REQUIRES AMERICAN COMPANIES WITH
50 OR MORE EMPLOYEES TO OFFER 12
WEEKS OF UNPAID FAMILY LEAVE TO
CARE FOR A NEWBORN, ANOTHER
CHILD, A SPOUSE, OR A PARENT
WITH A SERIOUS MEDICAL
CONDITION.
THE LAW ALSO REQUIRES EMPLOYERS
TO LET ANYONE TAKING THE LEAVE
TO COME BACK TO WORK.
NOW, DEMOCRATIC MEMBERS OF
CONGRESS HAVE REINTRODUCED A
BILL TO GRANT PAID FAMILY LEAVE,
AND IT'S AN IDEA PRESIDENT TRUMP
SAID HE WANTS TO PURSUE.
SOME STATES ARE ALREADY
EXPERIMENTING WITH PAID FAMILY
LEAVE, AND IN TONIGHT'S
SIGNATURE SEGMENT, NEWSHOUR
WEEKEND'S CHRISTOPHER BOOKER
WENT TO ONE OF THEM-- RHODE
ISLAND-- TO SEE HOW IT'S
WORKING.
>> Reporter: LIVING AND WORKING
IN RHODE ISLAND, JULIE MOURA HIT
THE FAMILY LEAVE LOTTERY.
>> NOT ONLY DID I GET 20 WEEKS
OFF, BUT I GOT 20 WEEKS PAID.
IT'S LIKE PEACE OF MIND, RIGHT.
YOU'RE GOING OUT AND YOU KNOW
THAT YOU'RE GOING TO CONTINUE TO
GET PAID AT THE SAME PAY, AND SO
YOU'RE NOT WORRYING ABOUT THAT
PIECE.
YOU'RE FOCUSING ON BONDING WITH
THE BABY.
>> Reporter: HER LENGTHY
MATERNITY LEAVE WAS A
COMBINATION OF A RARE STATE
INSURANCE PROGRAM AND HER
EMPLOYER'S PAID FAMILY LEAVE
POLICY.
SHE WORKS FOR THE RHODE ISLAND
BASED TOY COMPANY, HASBRO, THE
MAKERS OF MR. POTATO HEAD, MY
LITTLE PONY, AND SOME OF
AMERICA'S MOST WELL KNOWN BOARD
GAMES.
>> YOU KNOW, WE WANT TO BE AN
EMPLOYER OF CHOICE AND TALENT,
FOR US, IS EVERYTHING.
>> Reporter: DOLPH JOHNSON HEADS
HASBRO'S HUMAN RESOURCES TEAM.
HE SAYS PAID FAMILY LEAVE IS A
BENEFIT THAT ENTICES QUALITY
EMPLOYEES TO WORK FOR THE
COMPANY.
>> NOT ONLY ARE WE RECRUITING
GREAT TALENT, BUT THAT GREAT
TALENT, THEY'RE RECRUITING
COMPANIES.
SO IT'S REALLY IMPORTANT FOR US
TO MAKE SURE THAT THEY
UNDERSTAND HOW MUCH IMMENSE
VALUE WE PUT ON RAISING KIDS,
AND HOW IMPORTANT THAT IS,
BECAUSE, YOU KNOW, THAT'S
CENTRAL TO OUR BUSINESS.
>> Reporter: JOHNSON SAYS
COMPANIES LIKE DISNEY, GOOGLE,
AND NETFLIX ARE MODELS HASBRO
HAS TRIED TO EMULATE IN OFFERING
PAID FAMILY LEAVE.
DISNEY OFFERS 12 WEEKS OF
MATERNITY LEAVE, GOOGLE, FOUR
MONTHS, AND NETFLIX, UP TO A
YEAR OF PARENTAL LEAVE.
BUT THOSE COMPANIES AND HASBRO
ARE RARE.
ONLY 13% OF AMERICAN PRIVATE
SECTOR WORKERS HAVE ANY KIND OF
PAID FAMILY LEAVE.
IN FACT, THE 1993 FEDERAL FAMILY
AND MEDICAL LEAVE ACT REQUIRES
EMPLOYERS ONLY TO OFFER 12 WEEKS
OF UNPAID LEAVE.
COMPANIES WITH 50 OR FEWER
EMPLOYEES ARE EXEMPT, SO ONLY
ABOUT 60% OF AMERICAN WORKERS
ARE COVERED.
RHODE ISLAND DECIDED TO GO
FURTHER THAN FEDERAL LAW.
IT REQUIRES EMPLOYEES TO PAY
INTO A STATE FUND SO THEY CAN
TAKE PAID FAMILY LEAVE.
SO WHETHER YOU WORK FOR RETAIL
GIANT, URBAN OUTFITTERS OR A
SMALL VINTAGE CLOTHING STORE,
YOU ARE ELIGIBLE.
RHODE ISLAND'S PROGRAM ALLOWS
ELIGIBLE EMPLOYEES TO COLLECT
ABOUT 60% OF THEIR SALARY FOR
FOUR WEEKS TO CARE FOR A
NEWBORN, AN ADOPTED OR FOSTER
CHILD.
EMPLOYEES CAN ALSO THE BENEFIT
TO CARE FOR A SERIOUSLY ILL
CHILD, A PARENT, A SPOUSE, A
DOMESTIC PARTNER, A PARENT-IN-
LAW OR GRANDPARENT.
THE PROGRAM, CALLED TEMPORARY
CAREGIVER INSURANCE, OR T.C.I.,
IS AN EXTENSION OF THE STATE'S
LONG STANDING DISABILITY
INSURANCE.
FUNDED BY A 1.2% PAYROLL TAX ON
MOST RHODE ISLAND EMPLOYEES,
EVEN PART-TIME WORKERS ARE
ELIGIBLE FOR THE INSURANCE
PROGRAM.
THE MAXIMUM BENEFIT PAID OUT IS
ABOUT $800 A WEEK AND WORKERS
WHO TAKE IT ARE GUARANTEED THEIR
JOB BACK
WHEN RHODE ISLAND IMPLEMENTED
THE LAW IN 2014, IT BECAME ONLY
THE THIRD STATE TO MANDATE PAID
FAMILY LEAVE, AFTER CALIFORNIA
AND NEW JERSEY.
NEXT YEAR, NEW YORK IS SCHEDULED
TO JOIN THEM.
JULIE MOURA, WHO ALREADY HAD
PAID FAMILY LEAVE OFFERED BY HER
COMPANY, GOT EVEN MORE PAID TIME
OFF.
AND BECAUSE OF THE STATE
MANDATE, HER HUSBAND WAS ABLE TO
JOIN HER FOR FOUR WEEKS WHEN
THEIR LAST BABY WAS BORN.
>> I THINK THAT MY HUSBAND AND I
BOTH WERE ABLE TO NOT STRESS AS
MUCH AS WE DID THE FIRST TIME
AND KNOW THAT WE HAD THESE
ADDITIONAL WEEKS AND THE
ADDITIONAL AMOUNT OF PAY.
SO IT, I MEAN, INVALUABLE TIME.
>> THERE WAS CERTAINLY STRONG
SUPPORT FROM THE PUBLIC.
>> Reporter: RHODE ISLAND STATE
SENATOR, GAYLE GOLDIN SPONSORED
THE FAMILY LEAVE LAW.
THE DEMOCRAT WAS INSPIRED BY HER
PERSONAL EXPERIENCE.
16 YEARS AGO, A SERIOUS BACK
INJURY LEFT HER ON DISABILITY
FOR SEVERAL WEEKS.
>> THANKFULLY, RHODE ISLAND HAD
THIS TEMPORARY DISABILITY
INSURANCE IN PLACE, AND SO I WAS
ABLE TO USE THAT TO COVER MY OWN
CARE.
BUT MY HUSBAND DID NOT HAVE
ACCESS TO THAT IN ORDER TO CARE
GIVE FOR ME.
AND THAT'S REALLY WHEN WE
REALIZED WHAT A STRESSOR THAT
WAS ON A FAMILY WHEN YOU NEED TO
BE ABLE TO TAKE CARE OF SOMEBODY
ELSE.
>> Reporter: SENATOR GOLDIN SAYS
IN RHODE ISLAND, THE LAW IS
MEANT TO FILL THE GAP,
ESPECIALLY IN A STATE RANKED
NINTH IN RESIDENTS OVER AGE 65.
>> THE REALITY IS THAT MOST
CHILDREN HAVE THEIR PARENTS IN
THE WORKFORCE, AND MOST PEOPLE
ARE TRYING TO DEAL WITH AGING
PARENTS AND YOUNG CHILDREN AT
THE SAME TIME.
IT'S IMPORTANT THAT EVEN IF
PEOPLE WHO DON'T HAVE CHILDREN,
THEY DO HAVE LOVED ONES THAT ARE
GOING TO GET SERIOUSLY ILL AT
SOME POINT.
IT'S A REALITY WE ALL
EXPERIENCE.
SO THIS IS A WAY THAT WE CAN
ENSURE THAT EVERYBODY HAS AT
LEAST SOME MINIMUM BENEFIT WHEN
THEY NEED TO BE ABLE TO BE OUT
OF WORK TO DEAL WITH THOSE
ISSUES.
>> Reporter: AFTER THE PAID
FAMILY LEAVE LAW WAS
IMPLEMENTED, THE STATE LABOR
DEPARTMENT CONTRACTED UNIVERSITY
OF RHODE ISLAND SOCIOLOGIST
HELEN MEDERER AND PSYCHOLOGIST
BARBARA SILVER TO STUDY THE
PROGRAM.
>> THE PEOPLE WHO TOOK T.C.I.
WERE MORE LIKELY TO ENDORSE
BETTER PHYSICAL HEALTH, THEY
WERE MORE LIKELY TO INITIATE AND
SUSTAIN BREASTFEEDING FOR NEW
CHILDREN, THEY REPORTED LESS
STRESS, AND LESS FAMILY STRESS,
WHICH AS WE KNOW IS A MAJOR
PROBLEM.
>> WE ALSO FOUND A SIGNIFICANTLY
LOWER RATE OF ABSENTEEISM AFTER
RETURNING TO WORK, AMONG PEOPLE
WHO USE T.C.I.
>> Reporter: BUT THE RESEARCHERS
DID FIND A DIFFERENCE IN JUST
WHO WAS USING THE BENEFIT.
ACROSS ALL INCOME GROUPS, LOSS
OF PAY WAS THE MOST FREQUENTLY
REPORTED REASON FOR NOT USING
THE PAID FAMILY LEAVE PROGRAM,
BUT HIGHER EARNERS WERE MORE
LIKELY TO USE THE BENEFIT.
>> SO LOWER WAGE WORKERS NOT
ONLY DON'T HAVE THE ABILITY TO
TAKE WHAT'S OFFERED TO THEM,
FROM THE STATE, BUT THEY DON'T
HAVE ANY EMPLOYER BENEFITS, THEY
CAN'T AFFORD ALTERNATIVE CARE,
AND SO THEY'RE LEFT WITH
NOTHING, AND THEY'RE LEFT WITH
VERY UNHAPPY CHOICES.
DO I LEAVE MY SICK CHILD AT
HOME, AND GO TO WORK?
DO I NOT GO TO WORK, AND LOSE MY
JOB?
DO I REDUCE MYSELF TO PART TIME?
DO I GO ON PUBLIC ASSISTANCE?
WHICH IS WHAT A LOT OF PEOPLE
HAVE TO DO.
>> Reporter: THROUGHOUT THE
STATE, A MAJORITY OF SMALL AND
MEDIUM-SIZED EMPLOYERS SUPPORT
THE PROGRAM.
ONLY A QUARTER OPPOSE IT.
THAT OPPOSITION IS STRONGEST
AMONG SMALL BUSINESSES.
MIKE CHENEVERT RUNS SWISSLINE
PRECISION, A MANUFACTURING
COMPANY THAT PRODUCES COMPONENTS
OF MEDICAL, AEROSPACE, AND OTHER
COMMERCIAL PRODUCTS.
MOST OF HIS 51 EMPLOYEES ARE
HIGHLY SKILLED TECHNICIANS WHO
RUN COMPLEX MACHINES.
HOW MUCH TRAINING DOES IT TAKE
TO GET AN EMPLOYEE UP TO SPEED
TO BE ABLE TO RESPOND TO THESE
ORDERS?
>> TO GET SOMEBODY WHERE THEY
CAN PROGRAM AND SET UP A
MACHINE, IT DOES TAKE SOME TIME
AND INVESTMENT.
>> Reporter: SO, SIX MONTHS
OR...?
>> IT CAN TAKE UPWARDS OF A
YEAR.
>> Reporter: CHENEVERT SAYS THAT
EVEN THOUGH AS AN EMPLOYER HE
DOESN'T HAVE TO PAY INTO THE
T.C.I. PROGRAM, THERE IS A COST.
LOSING EVEN ONE WORKER FOR FOUR
WEEKS OF PAID FAMILY LEAVE CAN
HURT THE COMPANY'S PRODUCTIVITY.
>> WE'VE ALWAYS BEEN A FAMILY-
ORIENTED COMPANY.
WE'VE ALWAYS TRIED TO WORK WITH
OUR EMPLOYEES AND GIVE THEM THE
TIME THAT THEY NEED TO TAKE CARE
OF THEIR FAMILIES.
IT CAN REALLY BE DEVASTATING IN
SOME ASPECTS.
ESPECIALLY IF IT'S A TOP-NOTCH,
SOMEONE THAT'S GOING TO BE
SETTING UP AND PROGRAMMING THE
MACHINES.
I LOSE ONE PERSON THAT DOES
THAT, IT DEFINITELY CAN PUT A
LOT OF BURDEN ON THE OTHER
EMPLOYEES THAT ARE IN OUR
FACILITY.
>> Reporter: WHILE THE FEDERAL
FAMILY LEAVE LAW EXEMPTS
COMPANIES WITH 50 OR FEWER
EMPLOYEES, RHODE ISLAND'S LAW
DOES NOT.
>> YOU DO HAVE BIG COMPANIES
THAT ARE MULTIBILLION DOLLAR
COMPANIES, THEN YOU HAVE SMALLER
COMPANIES LIKE OURSELVES.
I MEAN IT'S, IT CAN BE DAUNTING
TO TRY TO KIND OF PUT EVERYBODY
IN THE SAME BUCKET.
SOME OF THE BIG COMPANIES HAVE A
LOT MORE RESOURCES THAN WE DO.
AND THEY ALSO OFFER DIFFERENT
BENEFIT PACKAGES THAT WE MAY NOT
BE ABLE TO MEET.
>> Reporter: WE MET WITH A SMALL
BUSINESS OWNER, AND WHILE HE IS
SUPPORTIVE OF THE EFFORT, HIS
CRITICISM IS THAT THE
PRODUCTIVITY HIT THAT HE TAKES.
>> THE REALITY IS PEOPLE HAVE
HEART ATTACKS WHETHER OR NOT YOU
HAVE TEMPORARY DISABILITY
INSURANCE IN PLACE.
SO BUSINESSES ALREADY HAVE TO
DEAL WITH THAT, THE LOSS OF
SOMEBODY BEING OUT OF OFFICE OR
OUT OF THE MANUFACTURING COMPANY
OR WHEREVER THEY ARE.
YOU KNOW, I THINK WHAT IS
IMPORTANT TO KNOW IS THIS IS AT
LEAST GIVING RELIEF TO THE
EMPLOYEE.
AND TO THE EMPLOYER, NOW THEY
ONLY HAVE ONE THING THAT THEY
HAVE TO DEAL WITH, WHICH IS HOW
TO FILL UP THAT SPACE WHILE THE
EMPLOYEE'S OUT.
>> Reporter: JOHN SIMMONS WOULD
LIKE THE FAMILY LEAVE INSURANCE
PROGRAM TO BE OPTIONAL.
HE'S EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR OF THE
RHODE ISLAND PUBLIC EXPENDITURE
COUNCIL, A BUSINESS-FUNDED
POLICY RESEARCH ORGANIZATION.
>> SO WE BELIEVE THE OPT-OUT
SHOULD BE PROVIDED FOR
EMPLOYEES.
THERE IS A WHOLE MARKET OUT
THERE ON SHORT- AND LONG-TERM
DISABILITY THAT COULD REPLACE
IT.
COULD BE MOBILE, COULD BE
PORTABLE BY THE EMPLOYEE AS
WELL.
>> Reporter: WHILE COMPANIES
LIKE HASBRO BELIEVE OFFERING
PAID FAMILY LEAVE BEYOND THE
STATE MANDATE GIVES IT A
RECRUITMENT ADVANTAGE, SIMMONS
WORRIES THE MANDATE TO OFFER
TEMPORARY CAREGIVER INSURANCE
HURTS COMPETITION FOR JOBS WITH
NEIGHBORING STATES.
>> MASSACHUSETTS AND CONNECTICUT
DO NOT OFFER T.C.I., SO WE NOW
ARE AT A DISADVANTAGE BECAUSE
PEOPLE THOUGHT THAT WAS THE
RIGHT APPROACH TO GO THINK OF
THIS AS A MARKET-DRIVEN
QUESTION.
THE EMPLOYER SHOULD BE ABLE TO
OFFER IT OR NOT OFFER IT.
>> Reporter: ABOUT 15,000 RHODE
ISLAND RESIDENTS HAVE TAKEN PAID
FAMILY LEAVE IN THE PAST THREE
YEARS.
NOW, SENATOR GOLDIN IS CURRENTLY
WORKING ON A BILL TO DOUBLE THE
STATE PAID FAMILY LEAVE BENEFIT
FROM THE MAXIMUM FOUR WEEKS TO
EIGHT.
>> WE CAN'T RELY SOLELY ON THE
PRIVATE SECTOR TO SOLVE THIS.
IT'S CERTAINLY GOOD WHEN A
COMPANY DOES STEP UP, BUT IT'S
NOT THE SOLUTION.
>> Reporter: BECAUSE IT IS NOT
ENOUGH?
>> IT WON'T COVER EVERYBODY, AND
THIS SHOULDN'T RELY ON WINNING
THE BOSS LOTTERY IN ORDER TO GET
THE BENEFITS THAT YOU NEED.
THIS IS SOMETHING THAT WE ALL
SHOULD BE INVESTED IN AND MAKING
SURE THAT EVERYBODY HAS IT.
>> Sreenivasan: THERE'S A
SPECIAL ELECTION ON TUESDAY FOR
AN OPEN SEAT IN THE HOUSE OF
REPRESENTATIVES TO FILL THE
VACANCY LEFT BY TOM PRICE, WHO'S
NOW THE SECRETARY OF HEALTH AND
HUMAN SERVICES.
THE RACE IS GETTING NATIONAL
ATTENTION AND MONEY.
THE SIXTH DISTRICT IN THE
ATLANTA SUBURBS, AS IT'S NOW
DRAWN, HAS BEEN SOLIDLY
REPUBLICAN FOR 25 YEARS.
BUT A 30-YEAR-OLD DEMOCRATIC
NEWCOMER, JON OSSOFF, IS MAKING
A STRONG RUN FOR THE SEAT.
JOINING ME TO DISCUSS THE RACE
IS "ATLANTA JOURNAL
CONSTITUTION" REPORTER GREG
BLUESTEIN.
WE DON'T USUALLY TALK ABOUT
GEORGIA 6th.
WHY IS THAT SUCH A BIG DEAL?
>> NO WE DON'T USUALLY TALK
ABOUT THE GEORGIA SIXTH.
MOST PEOPLE IN ATLANTA WOULD BE
A SLEEPY RACE WHEN TOM PRICE
WAS TAPPED AS DONALD TRUMP'S
HEALTH SECRETARY.
BUT TRUMP'S EARLY STRUGGLES AND
THE TEPID SUPPORT IN THE
DISTRICT HAVE MADE THIS
A NATIONAL STORY.
>> HOW MUCH MONEY IS FLOWING IN
BOTH SIDES OF THIS?
>> 14 MILLION HAVE ALREADY BEEN
SPENT ON THE ADVERTISING IN THIS
DISTRICT ALONE, AND JON OSSOFF
HAS RAISED AN UNPRECEDENTED $8.3
MILLION FOR A NEWCOMER IN A
CONGRESSIONAL CAMPAIGN.
HE HAS FLOODED THE AIR WAVES
WITH ADS AND CONSTITUENTS HAVE
GOTTEN TWO, THREE, FOUR FLIERS A
DAY.
>> Sreenivasan: "WELL, GEORGIA
COULD BE THE ONE THAT FLIPS BACK
AND FORTH."
THIS IS NOT A DISTRICT THAT HAS
EVER TRENDED DEMOCRATIC, AT
LEAST NOT IN THE LAST 25
YEARS.
>> PRICE HAS WON LANDSLIDE
VICTORY AFTER LANDSLIDE VICTORY
EVERY TWO YEARS.
DEMOCRATS ARE TEMPERING
EXPECTATIONS.
HIGHER PROFILE DEMOCRATS I'M
TALKING TO BUT WITH, COUPLED
WITH THE $8.3 MILLION HE'S
RAISED AND A SURGE OF
ENTHUSIASM AND THERE'S CLEARLY
AN ENTHUSIASM GAP AND JON
OSSOFF IS IN THE 40s IN MOST OF
THE POLLS, WITHIN THE STRIKING
DISTANCE OF 50% VICTORY THAT HE
WANTS BUT UNBELIEVABLY TOUGH
HAUL FOR HIM.
REPUBLICANS FAR OUTNUMBER
DEMOCRATS IN THE DISTRICT AND
THE DISTRICT HAS BEEN IN
REPUBLICAN HANDS ESSENTIALLY
SINCE JIMMY CARTER'S ERA.
>> Sreenivasan: THIS IS NOT
EXPECTED TO DECIDE THE WINNER ON
TUESDAY.
>> NO, IT IS NOT.
THERE ARE 18 CANDIDATES ON THE
BALLOT.
IF NO ONE GETS A MAJORITY OF
VOTE THERE WILL BE A JUNE 20
RUNOFF BETWEEN THE TWO TOP VOTE
GETTERS.
OSSOFF'S BEST CHANCE MIGHT BE TO
GET THAT OUTRIGHT VICTORY.
THE 11 REPUBLICANS ARE FRACTIOUS
SO OSSOFF IS AIMING FOR THE
OUTRIGHT VICTORY.
HE IS CLOSE IN THE POLLS, WITHIN
45 OF THE POLLS BUT WITHIN
STRIKING DISTANCE BUT NOT QUITE
THERE YET IT LOOKS LIKE.
>> Sreenivasan: HAS IT
ENERGIZED THE DEMOCRATIC BASE?
>> IT HAS.
WE ARE HEARING FROM NEW
DEMOCRATIC GROUPS, LIKE THE
RED CLAY REBELLION AND OUT OF
THE WOODWORK THESE DEMOCRATIC
GROUPS AND THESE DEEP RED
TERRITORIES ARE SHOWING UP.
JON'S CREEK IS REDDEST PART OF
THE DISTRICT AND A REPUBLICAN
STRATEGIST SENT ME A PICTURE OF
150 OSSOFF SUPPORTERS.
REPUBLICANS ARE STARTING TO GET
UNNERVED ABOUT IT ALL.
>> Sreenivasan: GREG BLUESTEIN.
THANKS SO MUCH.
>> THANK YOU FOR HAVING ME.
>>THIS IS PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND,
SUNDAY.
>> Sreenivasan: TODAY MARKS TEN
YEARS SINCE THE MOST LETHAL
SCHOOL SHOOTING IN THE UNITED
STATES-- THE 2007 MASSACRE AT
VIRGINIA TECH UNIVERSITY.
FAMILIES OF THE 32 STUDENTS AND
FACULTY SLAIN THAT DAY AND
SURVIVORS WHO WERE SHOT
GATHERED FOR A MIDNIGHT MEMORIAL
SERVICE ON CAMPUS.
A CANDLE WAS LIT FOR EVERYONE
KILLED AND EACH OF THEIR NAMES
WERE READ ALOUD.
MEMBERS OF THE VIRGINIA TECH
CORPS OF CADETS STOOD GUARD OVER
THE FLOWER-COVERED MEMORIAL FOR
32 MINUTES.
THIS MORNING, VIRGINIA'S
GOVERNOR AND SCHOOL OFFICIALS
LAID A WREATH AT THE OUTDOOR
MEMORIAL, AT 9:43 AM, THE TIME
WHEN A MENTALLY DISTURBED
STUDENT, ARMED WITH TWO SEMI-
AUTOMATIC PISTOLS, BEGAN
SHOOTING IN A DORM AND THEN A
CLASSROOM.
HE LATER SHOT HIMSELF.
THERE'S A MASSIVE NEW CRACK IN
ONE OF GREENLAND'S LARGEST
GLACIERS.
IT'S LOCATED IN THE CENTER
PETERMANN GLACIER'S ICE SHELF--
300 SQUARE MILES OF THICK ICE
THAT RESTS ON ARCTIC OCEAN WATER
IN THE NORTHWEST CORNER OF
GREENLAND.
SCIENTISTS STUDYING SATELLITE
IMAGERY TAKEN BY THE EUROPEAN
SPACE AGENCY WERE THE FIRST TO
OBSERVE THE CRACK.
NASA CONFIRMED IT WITH AERIAL
PHOTOGRAPHS ON FRIDAY.
THE CRACK COULD BE CAUSED BY
WARMING OCEAN WATERS UNDERNEATH
THE ICE SHELF CAUSING IT TO
MELT.
IT ELEVATES CONCERNS ABOUT MORE
OF THE PETERMANN GLACIER FALLING
APART, CONTRIBUTING TO SEA LEVEL
RISE.
IN 2010, A 100-SQUARE MILE
SECTION OF THE GLACIER-- FOUR
TIMES THE SIZE OF MANHATTAN--
BROKE OFF.
IN 2012, SO DID ANOTHER SECTION
ABOUT HALF THAT SIZE.
THE LOS ANGELES DODGERS HAVE
UNVEILED A STATUE OF THE LATE
JACKIE ROBINSON, OUTSIDE DODGER
STADIUM.
THE CEREMONY LAST NIGHT MARKED
THE 70TH ANNIVERSARY OF HIS
DEBUT AS THE MAJOR LEAGUES'
FIRST AFRICAN-AMERICAN PLAYER
BACK WHEN THE DODGERS PLAYED IN
BROOKLYN.
THE BRONZE STATUE SHOWS ROBINSON
STEALING HOME, A FEAT HE
ACCOMPLISHED 19 TIMES IN HIS TEN
YEAR, HALL OF FAME CAREER.
HIS WIDOW, RACHEL, AND THEIR TWO
CHILDREN WERE ON HAND FOR THE
UNVEILING.
FINALLY, "THE FATE OF THE
FURIOUS" HAS MADE BOX OFFICE
HISTORY, RACKING UP THE BIGGEST
MOVIE OPENING WORLDWIDE EVER,
EVEN BEATING "STAR WARS: THE
FORCE AWAKENS."
IT'S ESTIMATED THE EIGHTH
INSTALLMENT OF THE FRANCHISE
EARNED MORE THAN $532 MILLION
OVER THIS HOLIDAY WEEKEND.
SO FAR, THE SERIES HAS BANKED
ALMOST $4.5 BILLION AND
COUNTING.
THAT'S ALL FOR THIS EDITION OF
"PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND."
I'M HARI SREENIVASAN.
HAVE A GOOD NIGHT.